In the centuries before the Europeans arrived in Antigua, the Antiguan racers were numerous and widespread. The thick forest that covered the islands teemed with lizards, the snakes' favored prey, and the racer had no natural predators to threaten it.[7]

In the late 15th century, European settlers began to colonize and develop Antigua and Barbuda for huge plantations of sugarcane. The ships that brought slaves to the island (and those that also or instead carried away rum or other tropical products) also brought rats. Feasting on the sugarcane and, among other things, the eggs of the Antiguan racer, the rat population rocketed.[7]

The plantation owners, desperate to rid themselves of the rats, introduced Asian mongooses to kill the rats. However, they failed to realize that black rats (Rattus rattus) are mainly nocturnal, while the mongooses prefer to hunt during the day. The mongooses preyed heavily on the native ground-nesting birds, frogs, lizards, and Antiguan racers. Within 60 years, the snake had vanished completely from Antigua and most of its offshore islands, and many believed that it had become extinct.[7]

However, a few Antiguan racers survived on a tiny mongoose-free island known as Great Bird Island. A 3-month survey by conservation biologists from Fauna & Flora International found only 50 individuals alive in 1995.[8]

Conservation work quickly got under way with the eradication of rats, which threatened the racers on Great Bird Island.[9] The effort succeeded. In 1996, five adult racers were collected and sent to the Jersey Zoo for the first attempt at captive breeding.[6] The female racers laid 11 eggs with five hatching, but proved to be difficult to keep in captivity due to their feeding habits and low resistance to diseases. Nine of the 10 captive racers died because of the common snake mite.[6]

However, the eradication of rats and mongooses on Great Bird Island led to a population increase, with the number of racers on the island doubling in two years.[10] However, 20% of the racers were underweight because of the lack of prey lizards to maintain the population levels.[10] Efforts began to clear other offshore islands of Antigua of rats and mongooses to reintroduce the snake so the population could continue to grow.[10] Antiguan racers have been successfully reintroduced to Rabbit Island (1999), Green Island (2001), and York Island (2008), and their total population has increased to more than 1,000.[11]

The Antiguan racer was recently threatened by hurricanes, such as Hurricane Luis, Hurricane Georges, and Hurricane Irma, and now by deliberate killing by humans (despite being protected by law), flooding, drought, and inbreeding due to low genetic diversity.